## Brief documentation  


## Overview  
The Modern Fortran library __libsparse__ is a library that provides objects to create and handle rectangular and square sparse matrices using different formats:  

 * Linked List (LL);  


 * COOrdinate storage (COO) (with elements stored using a hashing function);  


 * Compressed Row Storage (CRS).   


The library is written following an object-oriented approach.  


## Compilation  
The library relies on different libraries, such as BLAS/LAPACK libraries, PARDISO (at this stage, Intel MKL PARDISO), and [METIS 5] (http://glaros.dtc.umn.edu/gkhome/metis/metis/overview).  

For compilation, go in the directory *libsparse/src/lib* and type *make* for the default options. By default, it will not be compiled against METIS 5. To compile with METIS 5, *make METISENABLE=1*  


Compilation with debug options (`-g -check all -traceback`) is possible by adding the argument `DEBUGENABLE=1`.  

Compilation for single precision is possible by adding the argument `DPENABLE=0`.  


## Methods  

Below the term *mat* refers to one of the three available sparse objects (i.e., llsparse, coosparse, or crssparse), except if it is mentioned otherwise. For more details, please refer to the documentation generated by Doxygen.    

To __construct__ (__initiate__) a sparse matrix, the constructor of the same name as the object, must be used, e.g.:  

````   
integer::dim1=100     !number of rows     
type(coosparse)::mat  
  
mat=coosparse(dim1)  
````  

Other options are possible for the constructor (see details in the module pages). For sparse matrices with upper storage (default: fulled storage), it must be mentioned as:  

````  
mat=coosparse(dim1,lupper=.true.)  
````  

This option can also be used to __load__ a matrix from a stream file.  


To __add__ a value *val* at the position (*row*,*col*) of a sparse matrix, the method *add* must be used, e.g.:  

````   
call mat%add(row,col,val)  
````  

To __convert__  a sparse matrix from a format to another format, the assignment = can be used. E.g., to convert from COO to CSR:  

````   
type(coosparse)::coomat  
type(crssparse)::crsmat  
  
csrmat=coomat  
````  

To __copy__ a sparse matrix, the assignment = can be used. E.g.,:  

````   
type(crssparse)::crsmat  
type(crssparse)::crsmatcopy  
  
csrmatcopy=crsmat  
````  

To __deallocate__  a sparse matrix, the method *destroy* can be used, e.g.:  

````   
call mat%destroy()  
````  

To extract the __diagonal elements__ of a sparse matrix into a array, the method *diag* must be used:  

````  
array=mat%diag()  
````  

To extract the __diagonal elements__ and __off-diagonals__ of a sparse matrix into a array, the method *diag* must be used:  

````  
extractedmat=mat%diag(x)  
````  


where *x* is the number of off-diagonals (next to the diagonal) that must be extraced. If *x* is equal to 0, only the diagonal will be extracted and stored into a sparse matrix.  

To __get a value *val*__ at the position (*row*,*col*) of a sparse matrix, the method *get* must be used, e.g.:  

````   
val=mat%get(row,col)  
````  

To __get one of the dimensions__ of a sparse matrix, the method *getdim* must be used:  

````   
val=mat%getdim(x)  
````  
where *x* is 1 (=*number of rows*) or 2 (=*number of columns*).  

To __get a permutation vector__ from the METIS 5 fill-reducing ordering approach, the method *getordering* can be used:  

````  
permarray=mat%getordering()  
````  

Options for METIS 5 can be changed through optional arguments of this method.  


To __create__ a CRS matrix from __existing arrays__, the method *external* must be used:  

````  
call crsmat%external(ia,ja,a)  
````  

where the arrays *ia*, *ja*, and *a* must have the same size as the ones of the sparse matrix *crsmat*.  

To __multiply__ a sparse matrix by a vector as, *y = alpha \* mat(trans) \* v + val \* y* , the method *multbyv* must be used:  

````  
call mat%multbyv(alpha,trans,v,val,y)  
````  
where *alpha* and *val* are double-precision real values, *v* and *y* are vectors, and *trans* (= 'n' or 't') relates to the transposition of the matrix.   
The method *multbyv* is based on the MKL Sparse BLAS library.  

To get the number of __non-zero elements__ of a sparse matrix, the method *nonzero* must be used, e.g.:  

````  
nonzeros=mat%nonzero()  
````  


To __print__ a sparse matrix as stored __to default output__ (screen), the method *print* must be used, e.g.:  


````  
call mat%print()  
````  

To __print__ a sparse matrix as stored __to a file__ called *file.dat*, the method *printtofile* must be used, e.g.:  


````  
call mat%printtofile('file.dat')  
````  


To __save__ a matrix in the internal format, the method *save* can be used:  

````  
call mat%save('file.stream')  
````  

To __set an entry__ to a specified value (even __0__), the method *set* can be used:  

````  
call mat%set(row,col,val)  
````  

To __set a permutation vector__,the method *setpermutation* can be used:  

````  
 call mat%setpermutation(array)  
````  

It is possible to get and set a permutation vector in one call as follows:  

````  
 call mat%setpermutation(mat%getordering())  
````  


To __solve__ a linear system of equations of the form *mat \* x = y*, the method *solve* must be used:  

````  
call mat%solve(x,y)  
````  
The method *solve* is based on Intel MKL Pardiso. If a permutation vector was provided with the method `setpermutation`, this permutation vector will be used by Intel MKL Pardiso (instead of determining it internally).  


To __sort__ a column (in an ascending order) within a row of a CRS sparse matrix, the method *sort* must be used:  

````  
call crsmat%sort()  
````  

To check if the sparse matrix is sorted (columns within rows), the method __issorted__ must be used:  

````  
sorted=mat%issorted()  
````  

where the variable __sorted__ is a logical.  


To check if the sparse matrix is a *square* matrix, the method __issquare__ must be used:  

````  
square=mat%issquare()  
````  

where the variable __square__ is a logical.  


To extract a __submatrix__ from a sparse matrix, the method *submatrix* must be used, e.g.:  

````  
submatrix=mat%submatrix(startrow,endrow,startrow,endrow,lupper=log)  
````  

where *log* is a logical to extract the full matrix (lupper=.false.) or the upper triangular matrix (lupper=.true.).  

